.. include:: ../references.txt

.. _gala-dynamics:

********************************
Dynamics (`gala.dynamics`)
********************************

For code blocks below and any pages linked below, we'll assume the following
imports have already been executed::

    >>> import astropy.units as u
    >>> import numpy as np
    >>> import gala.potential as gp
    >>> import gala.dynamics as gd
    >>> from gala.units import galactic

Introduction
============

This subpackage contains functions and classes useful for gravitational
dynamics. There are utilities for transforming orbits in phase-space to
action-angle coordinates, tools for visualizing and computing dynamical
quantities from orbits, tools to generate mock stellar streams, and tools useful
for nonlinear dynamics such as Lyapunov exponent estimation.

The fundamental objects used by many of the functions and utilities in this and
other subpackages are the |psp| and |orb| classes.

Getting started: Working with orbits
====================================

As a demonstration of how to use these objects, we'll start by integrating an
orbit using the :mod:`gala.potential` and :mod:`gala.integrate` subpackages::

    >>> pot = gp.MiyamotoNagaiPotential(m=2.5E11*u.Msun, a=6.5*u.kpc,
    ...                                 b=0.26*u.kpc, units=galactic)
    >>> w0 = gd.PhaseSpacePosition(pos=[11., 0., 0.2]*u.kpc,
    ...                            vel=[0., 200, 100]*u.km/u.s)
    >>> orbit = pot.integrate_orbit(w0, dt=1., n_steps=1000)

This numerically integrates an orbit from the specified initial conditions,
``w0``, and returns an |orb| object. By default, the position and velocity are
assumed to be Cartesian coordinates but other coordinate systems are supported
(see the :ref:`orbits-in-detail` and :ref:`nd-representations` pages for more
information).

The |orb| object that is returned contains many useful methods, and can be
passed to many of the analysis functions implemented in Gala. For example, we
can easily visualize the orbit by plotting the time series in all Cartesian
projections using the :meth:`~gala.dynamics.Orbit.plot` method::

    >>> fig = orbit.plot()

.. plot::
    :align: center

    import astropy.units as u
    import gala.potential as gp
    import gala.dynamics as gd
    from gala.units import galactic
    pot = gp.MiyamotoNagaiPotential(m=2.5E11, a=6.5, b=0.26, units=galactic)
    w0 = gd.PhaseSpacePosition(pos=[11., 0., 0.2]*u.kpc,
                               vel=[0., 200, 100]*u.km/u.s)
    orbit = pot.integrate_orbit(w0, dt=1., n_steps=1000)
    fig = orbit.plot()

Or, we can visualize the orbit in just one projection of some transformed
coordinate representation, for example, cylindrical radius :math:`\rho` and
:math:`z`::

    >>> fig = orbit.represent_as('cylindrical').plot(['rho', 'z'])

.. plot::
    :align: center

    import astropy.units as u
    import gala.potential as gp
    import gala.dynamics as gd
    from gala.units import galactic
    pot = gp.MiyamotoNagaiPotential(m=2.5E11, a=6.5, b=0.26, units=galactic)
    w0 = gd.PhaseSpacePosition(pos=[11., 0., 0.2]*u.kpc,
                               vel=[0., 200, 100]*u.km/u.s)
    orbit = pot.integrate_orbit(w0, dt=1., n_steps=1000)
    _ = orbit.represent_as('cylindrical').plot(['rho', 'z'])

From the |orb| object, we can also easily compute dynamical quantities such as
the energy or angular momentum (we take the 0th element because these functions
return the quantities computed at every timestep)::

    >>> E = orbit.energy()
    >>> E[0] # doctest: +SKIP
    <Quantity âˆ’0.060740198 kpc2 / Myr2>

Let's see how well the integrator conserves energy and the ``z`` component of
angular momentum::

    >>> Lz = orbit.angular_momentum()[2]
    >>> np.std(E), np.std(Lz) # doctest: +FLOAT_CMP
    (<Quantity 4.654233175716351e-06 kpc2 / Myr2>,
     <Quantity 9.675900603446092e-16 kpc2 / Myr>)

We can access the position and velocity components of the orbit separately using
the attributes ``.pos`` and ``.vel``. These objects are
`~astropy.coordinates.BaseRepresentation` and
`~astropy.coordinates.BaseDifferential` subclasses. By default, as in this
example, both are Cartesian (`~astropy.coordinates.CartesianRepresentation` and
`~astropy.coordinates.CartesianDifferential`), so to access the individual
components, e.g., ``x``, we use::

    >>> orbit.pos.x # doctest: +FLOAT_CMP
    <Quantity [ 11.        , 10.99714901, 10.98864505,...,   6.42504843,
                 6.60915155,  6.78853526] kpc>
    >>> orbit.vel.d_x # doctest: +FLOAT_CMP
    <Quantity [ 0.        ,-0.00567747,-0.01130248,...,  0.186418  ,
                0.18174341, 0.17698051] kpc / Myr>

Continue to the :ref:`orbits-in-detail` page for more information.

Using gala.dynamics
===================

More details are provided in the linked pages below:

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   orbits-in-detail
   nd-representations
   actionangle
   mockstreams
   nonlinear

.. automodapi:: gala.dynamics
